GWEN IFILL: Good evening. I'm
Gwen Ifill.
Judy Woodruff is away.
On the "NewsHour" tonight:
Wisconsin voters
head to the polls in a tight
primary race
with both front-runners
trailing.
Also ahead: From meal choices to
grades, schools
are collecting substantial
amounts of data
on their students. But are they
protecting
their privacy?
SUZETTE LOPEZ, Mother: My son's
Social Security
was stolen. So, he was stolen,
and it took
three years to clear up and
three years to
keep on telling the IRS that my
son was my
son.
GWEN IFILL: And Villanova wins
the NCAA men's
title in a buzzer beater, as all
eyes turn
to a potentially historic
women's title final.
All that and more on tonight's
"PBS NewsHour."
(BREAK)
GWEN IFILL: It's been another
big day on the
presidential calendar, and for
the candidates,
it's another tense night of
watching returns.
The people of Wisconsin had
their say today
in the race for the two parties'
nominations.
Democrats are awarding 96
delegates, Republicans
42. We will hear from John Yang,
reporting
from Milwaukee, after the news
summary.
In the day's other news: The so-
called Panama
Papers leak claimed its first
major casualty.
Iceland's prime minister
resigned after revelations
that he sheltered huge sums
offshore during
an economic crisis. Thousands of
Icelanders
protested yesterday after the
news came out
in millions of leaked documents.
They detail
tax avoidance schemes by world
leaders and
others.
In Washington, President Obama
pointed to
the Panama Papers revelations as
he touted
new rules that target tax
inversions. That's
when U.S. companies shift
ownership of their
interests overseas, on paper at
least, to
take advantage of lower tax
rates.
At the White House today, Mr.
Obama called
inversions one of the most
insidious corporate
practices.
BARACK OBAMA, President of the
United States:
When companies exploit loopholes
like this,
it makes it harder to invest in
the things
that are going to keep America's
economy going
strong for future generations.
It sticks the
rest of us with the tab. And it
makes hardworking
Americans feel like the deck is
stacked against
them.
GWEN IFILL: The president
acknowledged the
loophole is legal, but he said
that's exactly
the problem, and he urged
Congress to close
it for good.
In South Africa, Parliament
voted down an
attempt today to impeach
President Jacob Zuma.
His African National Congress
and the main
opposition engaged in fierce
debate, but,
in the end, the impeachment
motion was defeated
233 to 143. Zuma got into
trouble for using
$16 million in state funds to
renovate his
home. Last week, South Africa's
top court
ruled he'd ignored a court order
to repay
part of the money.
The government of Greece has
temporarily halted
deportations of migrants to
Turkey after just
one day. The European Union plan
hit a snag
when 4,000 potential deportees
applied for
asylum. Meanwhile, migrants
protested at a
holding center on the Greek
island of Lesbos.
They and others condemned the
return.
MAN (through translator): I
don't want to
go back to Turkey. We prefer to
die. I don't
want to go to Turkey. There are
problems there.
What should we do, die in
Pakistan? It's better
that we die here, so that Greece
understands
what's going on.
GWEN IFILL: Also today, Greece
announced that
Pope Francis and Ecumenical
Patriarch Bartholomew,
leader of the world's orthodox
Christians,
will visit Lesbos next week.
Back in this country, the
governor of Mississippi
signed a bill that lets
businesses refuse
to serve gays and lesbians on
religious grounds.
Similar bills have been vetoed
in Georgia
and South Dakota. And, in North
Carolina,
a new law that limits bathroom
options for
transgender people prompted
PayPal today to
cancel expansion plans in the
state.
And Wall Street had a bad day
after the head
of the International Monetary
Fund warned
the global recovery is still too
slow. The
Dow Jones industrial average
lost 133 points,
to close at 17603. The Nasdaq
fell nearly
48 points, and the S&P 500
dropped 21.
Still to come on the "NewsHour":
what's at
stake in today's Wisconsin
primary; Republican
senators break ranks to meet
with the Supreme
Court nominee; protecting
student privacy
in the age of big data, and much
more.
Tonight: Wisconsin is the center
of the political
universe, with presidential
primaries that
further define this 2016 race.
Republican front-runner Donald
Trump, who
has been trailing in recent
statewide polls,
lashed out again today at his
closest rival,
Texas Senator Ted Cruz.
DONALD TRUMP (R), Presidential
Candidate:
Well, Ted Cruz can't win.
There's no way he
can get the delegates. And
everybody has said
that. All of your friends and
everybody that
I have watched has said that
it's impossible,
almost impossible, for Ted Cruz
to win.
So, he would have to get it at
the convention,
which I think would be highly
unlikely. So,
he can't win. We can win fairly
easily. If
we won Wisconsin, that would be
a big help.
GWEN IFILL: Both Cruz and Ohio
Governor John
Kasich spent the day off the
campaign trail.
Democrats face a tight race in
the Badger
State as well, with Bernie
Sanders favored
to win. He began his day with an
impromptu
stop at a restaurant in
Milwaukee.
Hillary Clinton spent the day in
New York,
which holds its primary in two
weeks. She
talked about her drawn-out
battle with Sanders
on "The View."
HILLARY RODHAM CLINTON (D),
Presidential Candidate:
You have to look at the broader
perspective.
We have won some. He's won some.
But I have
2.5 million more votes than he
does.
(CHEERING AND APPLAUSE)
HILLARY RODHAM CLINTON: And
there is -- I
have a very significant lead in
delegates,
which is what eventually decides
who the nominee
is.
GWEN IFILL: Sanders is scheduled
to rally
supporters in Wyoming later
tonight.
For more on primary day in
Wisconsin, John
Yang joins us now from a
Milwaukee polling
site.
Hi, John. So, what's Election
Day look like
in Milwaukee?
JOHN YANG: Well, Gwen, it looks
a lot like
this in Milwaukee and all across
the state.
This is the municipal building
in downtown
Milwaukee.
State election officials all
across the state
reporting heavy turnout, long
lines, nothing
-- no problems, they say. But
they're projecting
a turnout of 40 percent, which
would be the
highest since 1980, and they
already say that
projection may be too low.
Even before the day began, they
had a lot
of votes; 209,000 absentee and
early in-person
votes, that's more than twice
the number of
the 2012. So it's big turnout
today. There's,
officials say, no problems with
the new voter
I.D. law. Anecdotal evidence on
social I.D.
suggests that only -- social
media suggests
that only a handful of people
have been turned
away.
The biggest problem people are
talking about
on social media, finding parking
near their
polling place, Gwen.
GWEN IFILL: Well, if the voter
I.D. laws,
the voter identification laws
have not depressed
turnout, what explains this
incredible turnout?
JOHN YANG: Well, you have got a
lot of interest
in the presidential race. But,
also, there
is a hot Supreme Court race,
state Supreme
Court race statewide. That's
driving a lot
of the turnout.
But I think the presidential
race is the big
draw here. But, also, in
Wisconsin, they have
prided themselves for many years
about voter
participation and voter turnout.
And also,
since 2010, when a party
fracture kept a lot
of Democrats home and they got
Scott -- Governor
Scott Walker was elected, the
Republicans
took over the state legislature,
the Republicans
took the Senate seat as well,
since then,
you have had the recall votes of
2011, 2012.
I think that voter turnout and
voter participation
is something that's become the
norm here in
Wisconsin.
GWEN IFILL: Well, you have had
those recalls,
those efforts to recall Scott
Walker along
the way, which also ginned up a
lot of turnout.
So, we have seen, as you well
know, the latest
polls show Ted Cruz and Bernie
Sanders doing
-- leading, not the
front-runners in everyplace
else, but these two leading in
this, in the
final polls going into tonight.
Does that
match with what you're seeing as
well?
JOHN YANG: That is.
That's what the latest -- the
last pre-election
polls were showing. And very
unscientific,
talking to folks, we seem to be
hearing a
lot about that.
Now, what that does, if those
things hold
up, what will that do to the
race? The way
the delegates are allotted here
in this race,
even if Donald Trump does lose
statewide,
there are -- the Republican
delegates are
allocated some statewide to the
statewide
winner, some winner-take-all in
congressional
districts.
And given his support in the
northern part
of the state, it's possible that
Donald Trump
could walk away tonight with a
handful of
delegates, not a lot, but when
he has that
much lead, every little bit
helps.
On the Democratic side, the
delegates are
apportioned proportionally. So,
if the race
is as close as the pre-election
polls indicate,
even if she loses, Hillary
Clinton's going
to walk away with a good share
of the delegates
tonight.
GWEN IFILL: And all of these
candidates have
already decamped to the next
battleground,
haven't they?
JOHN YANG: Well, actually,
Sanders was make
some last-minute stops here this
morning,
Donald Trump as well.
The only candidate who is going
to be here
tonight is Ted Cruz, which gives
you perhaps
an indication of how he thinks
he's going
to do today.
GWEN IFILL: John Yang for us
tonight in Milwaukee,
thank you so much.
JOHN YANG: Thanks.
GWEN IFILL: You will be able to
find continuing,
constantly updated political
coverage, including
tonight's Wisconsin primary
results, online.
That's at PBS.org/NewsHour.
U.S. Supreme Court nominee
Merrick Garland
made the rounds on Capitol Hill
again today.
Senate Majority Leader Mitch
McConnell remains
determined not to hold
confirmation hearings.
Some Senate Republicans,
including Judiciary
Committee Chairman Charles
Grassley, have
announced a willingness to meet
the nominee,
although he and the Senate
majority leader
say they will not schedule
hearings or a vote.
Today, Judge Garland did meet
two Republicans,
Senator John Boozman of Arkansas
and Senator
Susan Collins of Maine.
She joins us now from Capitol
Hill.
Senator Collins, tell us about
your meeting
with the judge.
SEN. SUSAN COLLINS (R), Maine:
It was an excellent
meeting. We talked for over an
hour about
a range of issues that included
his judicial
philosophy, Second Amendment
cases, the separation
of powers, the executive
overreach. We were
able to touch on a great many
issues.
GWEN IFILL: Did you conclude
that he is qualified
for at least a hearing, if not
confirmation?
SEN. SUSAN COLLINS: I certainly
believe that
he is qualified for a hearing.
He has been a distinguished
jurist for 13
years on the D.C. Circuit Court,
and I found
his answers to demonstrate that
he's thought
deeply about the issues, that
he's highly
intelligent, and that he's a
careful, meticulous
judge.
Having said that, I would, of
course, not
make a final decision on his
nomination until
there were public hearings,
because it's that
kind of in-depth vetting that
gives you the
information that you need.
GWEN IFILL: As you know, your
colleague Senator
Mark Kirk of Illinois last week
also met with
Judge Garland and came away and
said that
he felt that his colleagues who
wouldn't do
that are closed-minded.
Do you agree with him?
SEN. SUSAN COLLINS: No, I
wouldn't say that,
although I would hope that more
and more senators
would find time in their
schedules to sit
down with Judge Garland. I
believe that they
would benefit from hearing from
him firsthand.
And I know that I did.
GWEN IFILL: You have said in
other interviews
that you are perplexed that
Senator McConnell,
that Majority Leader McConnell
is drawing
such a firm line on this. Tell
me what you
mean by that.
SEN. SUSAN COLLINS: Well, Gwen,
this is a
very unpredictable political
year.
And we have no idea who the next
president
is going to be. But if the next
is a Democrat, it's certainly
conceivable
that she or he might choose a
nominee who
is far to Judge Garland's left.
If the next president is Donald
Trump, he's
a very unpredictable person. Who
knows who
his nominee would be? In this
case, we have
a nominee with 19 years of
experience. And
I believe that we should take
the process
a step at a time.
And doing the meeting today was
the first
step, and I think the next step
should be
hearings.
GWEN IFILL: Did the White House
reach out
to you directly to ask you to
meet with him?
SEN. SUSAN COLLINS: Yes.
GWEN IFILL: And what did you say
to them?
SEN. SUSAN COLLINS: I said I
would be happy
to meet with them.
I would note that that is
standard procedure
with every Supreme Court nominee
on whom I
have ever voted, regardless of
what administration
it was. The White House asks you
to sit down
with the nominee. And I have
always found
that those one-on-one
conversations give me
a great insight into the
nominee's views,
integrity, intellect, fidelity
to the Constitution,
and respect for the rule of law.
GWEN IFILL: In your opinion,
Senator Collins,
is the opposition to Judge
Garland rooted
in principle, in policy, or in
politics?
SEN. SUSAN COLLINS: I believe
that the Senate
Republican leader, Mitch
McConnell, sincerely
believes that the next president
should choose
the next justice on the Supreme
Court.
I don't happen to agree with
him. As I look
at the Constitution, the
president has the
right, indeed the obligation, to
appoint judicial
nominees, to nominate people for
the courts,
including the highest court in
the land.
And, after all, President Obama
is our president
right now, and will be until
January of next
year. So, we just have an honest
disagreement
about this issue. But I
certainly respect
and understand the contrary
point of view.
GWEN IFILL: Part of what Senator
McConnell,
the point he has made is, why
drag Judge Garland
through what he called an
unnecessary political
routine if he's not going to be
considered
or confirmed?
SEN. SUSAN COLLINS: Well, I
don't think Judge
Garland views it that way, or he
wouldn't
have agreed to be nominated for
this important
post.
And he did agree to be
nominated. He is making
the rounds on Capitol Hill. And
one encouraging
sign to me is before the
congressional recent
recess, there were only two of
us on the Republican
side that were willing to sit
down with Judge
Garland one-on-one to meet with
him, and now
there are more than a dozen
Republican senators.
I believe that's a positive step
forward,
and it is the way the normal
process would
work. I would also note that it
is not unusual
for Supreme Court nominees to be
contentious.
There have been Democrats who
have blocked
Republican nominees, including
when President
Obama participated in a
filibuster to try
to block Justice Alito from
being named to
the court.
So, there have been political
shenanigans
on both sides of the aisle when
it comes to
the Supreme Court. I think it
would be better
if we depoliticized the process.
GWEN IFILL: Shenanigans is such
a good word.
Senator Susan Collins,
Republican of Maine,
thank you for joining us.
SEN. SUSAN COLLINS: Thank you.
GWEN IFILL: Stay with us.
Coming up on the "NewsHour":
racial bias in
medical care; archaeologists
return to a region
of Iraq threatened by ISIS; the
women Huskies
of the University of Connecticut
on track
to make basketball history; and
the harsh
cycle of poverty told through
the story of
evictions.
But, first, school districts
across the country
are going high-tech,
incorporating educational
apps and digital programs into
the classroom.
But fears about the privacy and
security of
students' personal information
are on the
rise.
Special correspondent John
Tulenko of Education
Week reports as a part of our
Tuesday night
series, Making the Grade.
JOHN TULENKO: Miami, Florida, is
taking on
one of public education's oldest
problems:
With so many students, how do
you personalize
instruction? One answer is with
computers.
At Miami's iPrep Academy,
one-size-fits-all
lessons are a thing of the past.
NICOLE RASMUSON, iPrep Academy:
We all started
at the very beginning, and then
some just
took off.
JOHN TULENKO: Nicole Rasmuson
teaches math,
using innovative software.
NICOLE RASMUSON: It's about 70
percent online.
And it's a smart program, and so
it checks,
are they understanding, are they
answering
questions correctly right away?
Are they struggling?
Is it taking them a long time to
answer questions?
Do they keep making mistakes?
JOHN TULENKO: All the while, the
computer
is crunching and storing data
about the students
and sending back customized
lessons.
NICOLE RASMUSON: It'll ask them,
what are
your interests? And so, in the
word problems,
it'll -- if one kid's really
interested in
food, it'll talk about cookies
and that kind
of stuff. It'll even ask them,
what are your
friends' names? And then it'll
put their friends'
names in the problems, too.
JOHN TULENKO: All that gets
uploaded, along
with student schedules, grades,
discipline
records, homework and even
e-mails, the makings
of what some have called a
digital profile,
that privacy expert Joel
Reidenberg fears
could someday be used in
unauthorized ways.
Joel REIDENBERG, Fordham
University: We're
going to have a lot of data
floating around,
with a lot of very detailed
information that
can be quite surprising.
One example: What a child eats
in the school
cafeteria is collected, using a
student I.D.
card. We can envision a day, for
example,
that a health insurance company
wants to see
what they ate when they were
third-graders
to decide how they were going to
underwrite
insurance. Is it farfetched?
Could be. We
don't know.
JOHN TULENKO: Already, students'
data has
been misused. Google was
recently sued for
scanning students' e-mail
accounts in order
to build advertising profiles.
The tech giant
has since stopped and pledged,
along with
214 other companies, not to use
student data
for commercial purposes.
But there are a whole lot more
companies out
there.
SUZETTE LOPEZ, Mother: I'm
trying to protect
my kids, and there's so much
data collection
that's going on right now that
we we're not
even aware of.
JOHN TULENKO: Suzette Lopez is a
graphic designer
who sends her children to Miami
public schools.
SUZETTE LOPEZ: It's these
third-party vendors
that are what we're partnering
with, that
we're bringing them in. But
then, how much
oversight really is there with
these partners?
Who's keeping an eye on that
data?
ALBERTO CARVALHO, Miami Public
Schools Superintendent:
I think that's absolutely a
legitimate concern.
But I think responsible school
systems that
have the appropriate policies
and safeguards,
quite frankly, reduce that
threat.
JOHN TULENKO: To protect
personal data, Miami
Superintendent Alberto Carvalho
requires that
teachers and students use a web
portal. All
the apps and software inside
have been vetted,
and the companies must sign
contracts that
prohibit any unauthorized or
commercial use
of students' information. These
rules are
strictly enforced.
ALBERTO CARVALHO: I can tell
you, the penalties
that we apply in Miami when
private companies
default on their contractual
obligation, which
is we bar them from future
business with the
school system.
JOHN TULENKO: So far, the
district says, the
tech companies have stuck to the
rules. But
at iPrep, teachers say they go
outside the
portal to use unregulated apps
everyday. And
they're not the only ones.
I would love to go around this
little group
and ask you to name some apps
that you have
downloaded on your school
computer that are
not part of the portal.
STUDENT: I have downloaded
ooVoo, Skype, Spotify,
Octagon, so just the basic
stuff.
STUDENT: Yes, I found, like,
several very
easy reach-arounds to the school
Wi-Fi and
the different barriers they put
up. They're
pretty easy to go around. It's
not the most
comprehensive barriers in the
world.
ALBERTO CARVALHO: Isn't that the
definition
of true human ingenuity? And
there is no gadget,
no amount of technology that
stands up to
the ingenuity of a kid.
But that's where the social and
behavior teaching
come in. That is the most
important thing
we can do, is actually teach
students responsible
use, liabilities, but also the
benefits of
using this new technology in
this new environment.
JOHN TULENKO: Even if students
took those
lessons to heart, their personal
data, including
names, addresses, and Social
Security numbers
can still be compromised. It
happened in the
case of Pamela Rhim-Grant.
FRANK MADERAL, U.S. Assistant
United States
Attorney: Pamela Rhim-Grant was
a food services
manager at the Horace Mann
Middle School here
in Miami, and she was found to
have been stealing
student identities from the
Miami-Dade public
school computer system.
JOHN TULENKO: In 2014, Assistant
U.S. Attorney
Frank Maderal prosecuted
Rhim-Grant for stealing
Social Security numbers from 400
students
and using them to file
fraudulent tax returns.
Exactly what did she have to do
in order to
walk away with a child's Social
Security number?
FRANK MADERAL: Login, access the
information,
print it out.
SUZETTE LOPEZ: My son's social
security was
stolen. So, he was stolen and it
took three
years to clear up and three
years to keep
on telling the IRS that my son
was my son.
JOHN TULENKO: Lopez's family was
victimized
in 2008, well before the
Rhim-Grant case,
but the effect was the same.
SUZETTE LOPEZ: I went to go file
my taxes,
and I couldn't. I'm extremely
protective and
I'm very careful about stuff,
and for his
number, which is not readily
used, was shocking.
JOHN TULENKO: Miami school
officials say hackers
on the outside have never
successfully broken
in and stolen student data. But
the growing
amount of sensitive information
stored electronically
has driven lawmakers in at least
15 states
to restrict what companies can
collect and
mandate steps to protect it.
That heightened security could
put a damper
on digital tools that
personalize learning.
In Miami, Florida, I'm John
Tulenko of Education
Week reporting for the "PBS
NewsHour."
GWEN IFILL: A new study finds
African-American
patients are often treated
differently when
it comes to medicine and care.
The survey
of more than 500 people, 400 of
them medical
students, found implicit bias
exists that
may help explain why black
people are sometimes
undertreated for pain.
Among its findings: Medical
students believed
that African-Americans felt less
pain than
white patients, and even thought
their skin
was thicker.
For more on this perplexing
discovery, we
turn to Dr. David Satin of the
University
of Minnesota Medical Center, and
Dorothy Roberts
of the university of
Pennsylvania.
Thank you both for joining us.
Dr. Satin, try to describe this
disparity
for me. Why does this exist? And
is it new?
DR. DAVID SATIN, University of
Minnesota Medical
Center: So, Gwen, we have known
that this
has been an issue for at least a
couple decades.
And every now and then, a study
comes out
that underscores the need for
the field of
medicine, and in particular
medical education,
to do some work and get it
right.
So, this is a problem, and it's
been a problem,
and hopefully this study will
spur on more
activity.
GWEN IFILL: Dorothy Roberts, is
this a medical
problem or a sociological
problem?
DOROTHY ROBERTS, University of
Pennsylvania:
It's both.
I think what's really important
and fascinating
about the study is that it, for
the first
time, links what we have long
known as undertreatment
of pain for black patients with
doctors, or
at least medical students' false
beliefs about
biological differences based on
race.
And those beliefs, as the study
has shown,
are widely held by laypeople as
well. They're
deeply embedded, longstanding
myths about
racial difference, especially
biological differences
between races, which goes back
to the very
concept that race is a
biological difference
that is widespread in U.S.
society. So it's
sociological, as well as
medical.
GWEN IFILL: Dr. Satin, I have to
say the thing
that surprised me the most was
that medical
students would think this way,
as well as
laypeople.
So, are they being taught this?
Is this something
they just bring with them?
DR. DAVID SATIN: Unfortunately,
it's both.
So, medical students, doctors
are people,
too. We live in society, and
we're exposed
to the same decade-after-decade
experiences
that determine our beliefs.
However, one of
the things one of the medical
student pointed
out to me this morning is that
some of these
false beliefs seem to peak in
second year
-- the second year of medical
school, as students
prepare for the boards and have
been memorizing
these associations to answer on
the board
exams.
GWEN IFILL: This is a taught
behavior or action.
This is a conscious stereotype,
as well as
a subconscious one.
DOROTHY ROBERTS: Absolutely.
It's deeply rooted and
fundamental to the
way medical education works in
the United
States. Students are taught to
notice the
race of their patients, to treat
their patients
differently because of race, and
they're taught
that that's because of
fundamental biological
differences between people of
different races.
So, while this is in part based
on myths and
stereotypes that are widely held
in U.S. society,
it's also based on the way
students are taught
to treat patients in medical
schools. It requires
a radical change in medical
education to address
this, not only addressing
implicit bias, but
also changing the way in which
human beings
are treated and differences are
considered
in medical education.
GWEN IFILL: David Satin, there
are actually,
to be fair, race, not specific,
exactly, conditions,
but medicines and conditions
which are more
likely to affect one race or the
other.
DR. DAVID SATIN: Those are
controversial.
We know that race is actually a
socially constructed
concept. It's not biological,
nor is it genetic,
as we learned from the Human
Genome Project.
And so while there are some
associations,
those are largely due to social
effects, how
we're raised. Often, ethnicity
plays a factor.
But they are not biological
effects.
GWEN IFILL: But environmental
effects, perhaps?
DOROTHY ROBERTS: Well, I think
that's really
important for medical students
to understand
and for their teachers to teach
them is the
difference between health
outcomes, disparate
health outcomes, and the idea
that they're
caused by innate biological
difference, which
is false, vs. how racism does
affect health
based on social inequality, not
because of
innate biological or genetic
differences between
the races.
And this study points out how
dangerous it
is to continue to teach medical
students that
race is a biological category
that produces
these differences in health or
experience
of pain based on biological
differences between
the races.
GWEN IFILL: Well, let me ask you
both, this
wasn't a huge study.
This is 400, 500 people, but
what is your
thinking -- I will start with
you, David Satin
-- on what the consequences are
of these beliefs
and what should be done about
it?
DR. DAVID SATIN: So, the
consequences of the
beliefs, we saw in the study, is
part of what
results in unequal treatment.
It's part of
what results in health
disparities.
There's certainly enough blame
to go around
for how those result, but it's a
component.
And what it teaches us is that
we need to
be proactive. I teach the
medical students,
look, it's not your -- it's not
your fault
that you have these implicit
biases. You grew
up in society. We all have
these.
But now that you know, it's your
responsibility.
And we have some interventions
to try to reverse
that.
DOROTHY ROBERTS: But it also
requires a fundamental
change in the way in which
medical education
works, moving away from teaching
students
that the races are different
because of some
kind of innate biological
difference that
then causes health disparities,
and instead
showing how racism and other
structural inequities
cause health disparities, and
explore with
students how medical practice
can address
those.
GWEN IFILL: Dorothy Roberts of
the University
of Pennsylvania, and Dr. David
Satin of the
University of Minnesota Medical
Center, thank
you very much.
DOROTHY ROBERTS: Thanks, Gwen.
DR. DAVID SATIN: Thank you for
having me.
GWEN IFILL: When ISIS captured
the ancient
city of Palmyra in Syria last
year, they destroyed
and looted priceless pieces of
Middle Eastern
history.
The city was retaken last week
by Syria's
army, and as the extremists lose
more ground
in Iraq, archaeologists are
returning to endangered
sites to resecure the past.
Special correspondent Jane
Ferguson reports
from Northern Iraq.
JANE FERGUSON: Badly damaged,
but still standing.
Surveying the harm done to
Palmyra, a drone
flies above the ancient Roman
city.
Below, land mines and booby
traps slow the
work of Syrian experts, anxious
to walk amongst
these precious ruins again. When
ISIS stormed
into Palmyra nearly a year ago,
many feared
the UNESCO World Heritage Site
was lost forever.
The group used it for grisly
execution videos
and blew up two of its temples.
But much it is still intact, to
the relief
of Syria's antiquities chief,
Maamoun Abdulkarim.
Maamoun Abdulkarim, Syrian
Antiquities Chief
(through translator): We
expected the worst
because of the liberation
fighting, but I
think the nightmare is over. The
panoramic
picture of Palmyra is fine.
JANE FERGUSON: When they took
the town, Islamic
State fighters also executed
archaeologist
Khaled Asaad, one of the
country's top historical
scholars, who had dedicated most
of his life
to preserving Palmyra.
The presence of ISIS and other
warring groups
across the Middle East and North
Africa has
seen international
archaeologists abandon
beloved historical sites, from
Libya to Syria
and Iraq, fearful for their
security.
Now, with ISIS losing some
territory, there
is hope they may return to a
region that had
become so risky. In Northern
Iraq, a team
from Cambridge University is
back to work,
searching for signs of
Neanderthal life in
Shanidar Cave.
ISIS never took over this area,
but came deep
enough into Northern Iraq to
cause them to
delay their dig.
Professor Graeme Barker says the
fighting
across the region has upended
much work in
the field.
GRAEME BARKER, University of
Cambridge: It
has affected a lot of teams
because they can't
get back to places. And I have
worked before
in Libya, and in an area where
now it's impossible
to go to. So it's had a huge
impact in terms
of access by foreign teams.
JANE FERGUSON: He and his team
were not surprised
to hear that ISIS was destroying
historical
artifacts on their rampage
across the region.
GRAEME BARKER: Invading armies
have always,
liked, anything to do with
heritage, because
heritage is who we are. We very
much -- we
may not think about it
explicitly, but we
are very much rooted in our
past.
And archaeology is a highly
political subject,
which therefore comes back to
why it's really
important that these kind of
projects continue.
JANE FERGUSON: This dig was
originally meant
to take place in 2014. But it
had to be delayed
because ISIS came in and took
over Mosul city,
which is about 150 miles away
from here. That
year, say these archaeologists,
was a write-off
for that sort of work here.
But since then, they have come
back twice,
saying that the security is
sufficient for
them to continue their work. But
for archaeologists
across the Middle East, security
is now a
major concern, with the rise of
ISIS and other
armed groups targeting
historical sites.
Mosul was taken over by the
Islamic State
in 2014. The city and its
surrounding areas
are rich in antiquities and
historical sites.
In nearby Irbil, ancient pieces
from Mosul
rest in the museum, beyond the
reach of the
Islamic State.
Dr. Abdullah Khorsheed, who
leads the Iraqi
Institute for the Conservation
of Antiquities
and Heritage, is all too aware
of the damage
that has already been done.
DR. ABDULLAH KHORSHEED, Iraqi
Institute for
the Conservation of Antiquities
and Heritage
(through translator): We have
very strong
evidence of the damage because
we are still
in communication with the
officials who have
been working there in Mosul and
because of
the images and the videos being
published
throughout social media.
We are sure that most of these
archaeological
sites have been destroyed by
ISIS. On a daily
basis, we hear that ISIS is
trying to destroy
many such areas.
JANE FERGUSON: For
archaeologists like him,
they have mixed feelings about
an imminent
military campaign to retake
Mosul. Getting
ISIS out of its historical sites
may mean
damaging them in the process.
DR. ABDULLAH KHORSHEED (through
translator):
When we talk about a war, it
means entire
cities will be devastated and
destroyed. This
is what wars usually bring. And,
certainly,
when we try to push ISIS from
Mosul and use
aerial attacks, those sites will
be damaged
again.
JANE FERGUSON: One ancient gem
the Islamic
State did not manage to capture
sits in the
heart of Northern Iraq's
Kurdistan. It remains
one of the very few postcard
images of the
Middle East still open to
historians.
The Citadel in Irbil is the only
UNESCO World
Heritage Site in all of Syria
and Iraq not
on the danger list, and yet,
when ISIS pushed
into Iraq in 2014, they came
within 30 miles
of it, threatening one of the
very last cultural
treasures in the country.
Archaeologists from around the
world have
flocked to the Middle East for
centuries to
study and preserve evidence of
humanity's
past. Now, after watching so
much destruction,
they will be needed to help
piece it back
together again.
For the "PBS NewsHour," I'm Jane
Ferguson
in Northern Iraq.
GWEN IFILL: Now to an instant
sports classic,
and college basketball history,
possibly on
two straight nights.
William Brangham is here with
the latest on
the NCAA championships, starting
with last
night's amazing men's title
game.
WILLIAM BRANGHAM: This had been
a close game
throughout the night. The North
Carolina Tar
Heels, in white, were trailing
Villanova by
just three points with just
seconds left when
the ball ends up in Marcus
Paige's hands.
ANNOUNCER: They're going to have
to do something
from the outside now. It's Paige
off-balance.
Impossible! How did he do that?
Ties the game
with 4.7 seconds to go.
WILLIAM BRANGHAM: With just a
little more
than four seconds to go,
everyone thought
it was headed for overtime, but
then this:
ANNOUNCER: Three seconds at
midcourt. Gives
it to Jenkins for the
championship.
(CHEERING AND APPLAUSE)
ANNOUNCER: Villanova,
phenomenal, the national
champions, with Jenkins hitting
the winner
at the buzzer!
WILLIAM BRANGHAM: It was the
first time a
team hit a three-pointer at the
buzzer to
win the men's title. And more
history could
be made tonight.
The University of Connecticut
women's team
is going for its 11th title, and
its fourth
in a row when they play
Syracuse.
To help us catch our breath and
appreciate
all of this, we turn to
sportswriters John
Feinstein of The Washington Post
and numerous
books. He joins us from Augusta,
Georgia,
where he's covering The Masters
for The Golf
Channel. And Mechelle Voepel of
ESPNW.
So, John Feinstein, I would like
to start
with you.
Last night, it's tough to beat a
game like
that for excitement and
adrenaline. Is that
the best NCAA Final you have
ever seen?
JOHN FEINSTEIN,
Sportswriter/Author: I have
seen 38 of them, William, and
none like that
one, because no one did anything
wrong in
that climactic final minute.
Villanova made all four of their
three-throws.
Carolina made an extraordinary
three-pointer
by Marcus Paige to tie the game
and climax
their 10-point comeback. And
then Villanova,
at a moment when you would have
thought they
might panic, not only got a
winning shot off,
but their point guard, Ryan
Arcidiacono, had
the wherewith to realize he had
time, even
with under two seconds on the
clock, to pass
the ball to his best shooter,
Kris Jenkins,
who nails the three-pointer at
the buzzer.
Have never seen anything quite
like it. I'm
not sure we will ever see
anything quite like
it again. It was extraordinary.
WILLIAM BRANGHAM: So, this goes
down as instant
classic in your mind?
JOHN FEINSTEIN: Oh, at the very
least. Instant
classic might be an
understatement.
And I tend to people overstate
things, because
we all think the last thing we
saw was the
best thing we saw. But this one
was extraordinary.
These were clearly the two best
teams. They
had rolled over all their
opponents to get
to the final, including Saturday
night in
the semis, when Villanova beat
Oklahoma by
44 and North Carolina beat
Syracuse by 17.
And neither could dominate the
other. It ended
the way it should, with one team
making a
shot at the buzzer after another
team had
made a remarkable play just to
tie the game.
WILLIAM BRANGHAM: I'm curious.
When you saw
Marcus Paige hit that incredible
three-pointer,
did you think that was going to
overtime?
JOHN FEINSTEIN: I did. I
honestly did. And
the reason I thought it was
because Villanova
had to be deflated at that
moment. They'd
lost a 10-point lead. They
hadn't done anything
wrong, and yet the game was
tied. They defended
very well on that play where
Paige hit that
shot that you're referring to.
And it's to Jay Wright's credit
and the credit
of a very experienced team that,
in that huddle,
they were able to get their act
together and
run a play. It's called Nova
that they run
in practice every day at the end
of practice,
and they acted as if they were
in an empty
gym, rather than in a football
stadium with
75,000 people there and millions
watching
on TV. Incredible calm under
pressure.
WILLIAM BRANGHAM: All right,
Mechelle Voepel,
let's turn to tonight.
Obviously, incredible game last
night, and
another potential piece of
history happening
tonight. Of course, no one
thinks that tonight's
game is going to go down to the
buzzer. I
mean, we have got University of
Connecticut
just on an unbelievable roll,
such a long
winning streak. They're hoping
to really rack
up an incredible number of
titles if they
win tonight.
How do you explain their
dominance in the
women's game?
MECHELLE VOEPEL, ESPNW: They
have got an incredible
coach in Geno Auriemma, somebody
who has really
been ahead of the game for so
many years now.
And he's got great continuity in
staff. His
top assistant, Chris Dailey, has
been with
him ever since they have been --
when they
took over the program at
Connecticut back
in 1985.
And they are able to get not all
the best
players in the country, but the
best players
that they want, and players who
want to be
coached, players who are good
when they come
there, but know that they can be
great when
they leave. And that's been a
big recipe for
success for them.
WILLIAM BRANGHAM: Everyone does
talk about,
just as you did, the influence
of their coach.
What is he doing? What's the
special sauce
there?
MECHELLE VOEPEL: Well,
obviously, he is a
great X's and O's basketball
genius. There's
no doubt in my mind about that.
And if you talk to the
professional players
who went to UConn or even the
professional
players who played for him on
the U.S. national
team -- he will be coaching in
the Olympics
for the second time later this
year -- they
talk about how he really was
ahead of the
game even 10, 20 years ago in
understanding
how to teach read-and-react
offense, how to
get his players to play at a
pace that put
other teams on their heels from
the very beginning
of the game.
He really is a basketball
genius. And what
he's done with the media has
been incredible,
too. He's given an enormous
amount of time
to the media, and he's a funny
guy. Sometimes,
he's a very outspoken guy,
sometimes a controversial
guy, but he's been a terrific
spokesman for
women's sports and women's
basketball specifically.
WILLIAM BRANGHAM: University of
Connecticut's
dominance, has it been a good
thing for women's
basketball or a bad thing? I
mean, I have
heard it argued both ways. What
is your take
on that?
MECHELLE VOEPEL: I never see how
excellence
is a bad thing.
And the comparison that a lot of
us have made
for years is what UCLA did and
John Wooden
did for men's basketball, at one
point winning
seven titles in a row. UConn
women tonight
are going to be going for four
titles in a
row.
They have raised the bar. And I
think in every
single sport, you have had
individuals or
teams that have raised the bar
that everybody
else has to try on match to beat
them. And
I understand that some people
look at some
of their games and say it's
boring because
they beat the other team by so
much.
But when you watch -- actually
watch them
play, what isn't boring is just
how well they
play basketball, and I think
then that's something
for everybody who is trying to
chase them
to aspire to.
WILLIAM BRANGHAM: John
Feinstein, what do
you make of that?
JOHN FEINSTEIN: Well, I think
dynasties are
good for any sport, because they
bring people
to that sport who might not
normally be paying
attention.
You can't not notice what the
UConn women
have attained. You couldn't not
notice what
Tiger Woods did in golf when he
was dominating
the sport. You can't not notice
what UCLA,
as Mechelle said, back when they
won 10 titles
in 12 years.
I think it's good for sports
when you have
a dynasty, because it does raise
the level
of interest in the sport. The
other thing
that UConn has going for it is,
unlike in
the men's game, the women stay
for four years.
So, you're more likely -- you
have a better
possibility to have a dynasty,
because the
stars stay. They don't turn pro
after a year
or two.
WILLIAM BRANGHAM: All right,
well, we will
be watching tonight.
John Feinstein, Mechelle Voepel,
thank you
both very much for being here.
JOHN FEINSTEIN: My pleasure.
MECHELLE VOEPEL: Thank you.
GWEN IFILL: Now a look at the
cascading effect
of poverty on housing in
America.
Jeffrey Brown has that in this
latest addition
to the "NewsHour" Bookshelf.
JEFFREY BROWN: Every year in
this country,
families are evicted from their
homes, not
by the tens of thousands or by
the hundreds
of thousands, but by the
millions, that from
a new book that explores a huge,
but little
discussed phenomenon in America
today.
"Evicted: Poverty and Profit in
the American
City" follows the lives of eight
Milwaukee
families, black and white.
Author Matthew
Desmond lived among them in 2008
to 2009.
He's a sociologist, a professor
at Harvard
and a winner of a MacArthur
Fellowship last
year.
And welcome to you.
MATTHEW DESMOND, Author,
"Evicted: Poverty
and Profit in the American
City": Thank you.
JEFFREY BROWN: Eviction is far
more prevalent
than most people think and far
less part of
the discussion around poverty in
this country.
Why do you think that's the
case?
MATTHEW DESMOND: I think we
focus a lot on
jobs. We focus a lot on mass
incarceration
and welfare reform.
But housing has been left out of
the debate
a little bit. We have focused on
public housing,
and we have focused on
neighborhoods, but
the private rental market, where
a vast majority
of low-income families are
living, has been
largely overlooked.
But here is this market that's
taking most
of what low-income families are
making. There's
a...
(CROSSTALK)
JEFFREY BROWN: An incredible
amount, percentage
of income. I mean, that's really
striking.
MATTHEW DESMOND: Yes. Yes.
JEFFREY BROWN: Seventy, 80, 90
percent.
MATTHEW DESMOND: Yes, that's
what I saw when
I was living with families in
Milwaukee. And
we reached a point today that we
know that
the majority of low-income
renters are paying
most of what they have just on
rent and to
keep the lights on.
JEFFREY BROWN: I said you
followed eight families.
Pick one person to explain sort
of how people
fall into this and how hard it
is to get out
of it.
MATTHEW DESMOND: Yes, yes.
I'm thinking of Arlene. You
know, Arlene was
a single mom. She had two young
boys. And
when I met her, she was living
in a pretty
run-down apartment in a
low-income neighborhood
and giving 88 percent of her
income on rent.
And she was facing terrible
choices. You know,
should I buy food or pay the
rent? Should
I contribute some money to the
funeral or
pay the rent?
And someone like Arlene,
eviction isn't necessarily
the result of irresponsibility.
It's more
inevitable.
JEFFREY BROWN: They're making
some bad choices,
but you're showing how it's a
kind of -- almost
a vicious cycle, right, of the
eviction playing
into those choices.
MATTHEW DESMOND: If you're
someone like Arlene
that's paying almost everything
you have to
the landlord, a very small
divergence can
invite an eviction.
The book opens with her
14-year-old hitting
a car with a snowball, you know,
and the man
jumping out, kicking in the
door, and that
causing the landlord to evict
the family.
Was that a bad choice? Eviction
isn't just
a condition of poverty. It's
also a cause
of it. It's making things worse.
JEFFREY BROWN: You show the
rawness of what
an eviction -- I mean, you
capture what it
looks like.
MATTHEW DESMOND: Yes.
JEFFREY BROWN: Describe that. I
mean, take
an example of what perhaps
struck you even
the first time you actually saw
what that's
like, when you see everything
thrown out of
the house.
MATTHEW DESMOND: I remember
seeing Arlene
get evicted in early January. It
was the coldest
day on record in Milwaukee.
You know, the weathermen said it
would be
40 degrees below with the
windchill. And seeing,
you know, a family's things
piled on a curb,
seeing children forced from
their homes, seeing
the things taken....
GWEN IFILL: We apologize that we
seem to have
lost the audio on Jeff's
excellent piece.
We will replay it at another
time.
On the "NewsHour" online:
Teachers whose racial,
cultural and socioeconomic
backgrounds differ
from their students' often face
unique challenges
in the classroom. Columbia
University's Chris
Emdin teaches tools teachers can
use in their
lesson plan. And he will join us
at 7:00 p.m.
Eastern tomorrow for a Twitter
chat. Find
out how you can participate on
our home page.
And don't forget to check our
home page for
up-to-the-minute results from
the Wisconsin
primary. All that and more is on
our Web site,
PBS.org/NewsHour.
Tonight on "Charlie Rose": a
conversation
with Secretary of State John
Kerry right here
on most of these PBS stations.
And now for our "NewsHour"
Shares, something
that caught our eye that we
thought might
be of interest to you too.
Forget the wine and cheese you
might normally
get at an art gallery opening.
If you would
like to see one of the newest
exhibits in
Florida, you're going to need a
wet suit.
Visitors taking the plunge at
the Florida
Keys National Marine Sanctuary
can now view
an underwater gallery mounted on
the world's
second-largest artificial reef.
Scuba divers over the weekend
hung 12 photo
illustrations on the USNS
Vandenberg, a World
War II-era ship intentionally
sunk off Key
West in 2009. The baroque-style
works, by
Austrian art photographer
Andreas Franke are
encased in Plexiglas and
silicone-sealed steel
frames to prevent water from
getting in.
Recreational divers willing to
make the 90-foot
journey below the surface can
enjoy the artwork
until early August.
And a quick update before we go.
Late today, San Francisco's
Board of Supervisors
voted to make that city the
first in the nation
to require businesses to provide
full paid
leave for new parents. They will
be granted
six weeks beginning in 2017.
With growing concern over
concussions and
related injuries, a start-up in
Upstate New
York is using wearable
technology to help
keep athletes safer. It's a
device that sends
head injury alerts as soon as
they happen
on the field and in the ring,
and also measures
the cumulative effect of
multiple hits.
From member station WXXI and
public media's
Innovation Trail, Sasha-Ann
Simons reports.
STUDENT: We start off with a
10-minute run.
After the run, we do what's
called a set.
We do jumping jacks, pushups,
squats, like
all that kind of stuff. And we
wrap our hands.
SASHA-ANN SIMONS: It's a daily
ritual for
Michael Robertson. The
16-year-old is on the
high school boxing team at
Aquinas Institute.
Six days a week, he gears up to
get in the
ring.
His head gear is high-tech.
Before every match,
he slips a small sensor inside
his headband
and then puts a helmet on. Jab
after jab,
the sensor, this one called the
Linx Impact
Assessment System, IAS, sends
real-time data
to his coach and parents through
an app. Not
only does the sensor help spot
signs of a
concussion. It also can uncover
other, more
common types of brain injuries.
MAN: One of the things that I
look at with
the device is not only how hard
they're getting
hit, but if they're getting hit,
getting hit
how often with blows that
register.
SASHA-ANN SIMONS: Aquinas has
been field testing
the concussion sensor for about
two years.
Inside the helmet, the sensor
registers the
amount of force from a blow and
will trigger
a green, yellow, or red light,
with red being
the indicator that the hit was
too hard to
ignore. The data's available in
real time
and can be stored for review
after the match.
MAN: We will check with the
system, and we
will also check with the
student, how did
their blow feel? And they're a
pretty good
system.
SASHA-ANN SIMONS: The blow is
also given an
impact assessment score.
DAVID BORKHOLDER, BlackBox
Biometrics: That
gives a number from one to 100,
and so you
can -- the individual can gauge
the severity
of each of those impacts on that
scale. But
we also capture all the detailed
data, which
is really critical for research.
SASHA-ANN SIMONS: David
Borkholder is in charge
of the technology at BlackBox
Biometrics,
which created LINX IAS. His team
is brainstorming
ways to push the technology
forward.
DAVID BORKHOLDER: Another
emerging area that
I think is actually going to be
even more
important are repetitive
subconcussive hits.
SASHA-ANN SIMONS: Recent
research has shown
that many brain injuries are
from subconcussive
hits, which don't display the
symptoms of
a concussion.
And according to Dr. Jeff
Bazarian of the
University of Rochester Medical
center, it's
important for wearable sensors
to be able
to pick up on those, too.
DR. JEFF BAZARIAN, University of
Rochester
Medical Center: There are
football players
that get hit all the time, day
in and day
out, never have a concussion. We
look at their
brains, it looks like they have
some mild
brain injury.
SASHA-ANN SIMONS: Over the
years, more companies
have introduced impact sensors
and more doctors
have diagnosed concussions.
Bazarian says that wasn't always
the case.
DR. JEFF BAZARIAN: People would
say, these
problems that you're having are
not rooted
in anything real. They're just a
psychiatric
response to being hit.
But now that we can see it,
people are saying,
oh, wow, this is kind of like a
stroke or
a ministroke. There's actually
injury here.
SASHA-ANN SIMONS: There's an
adage in boxing
that the best defense is to not
get hit.
Areole (ph) is a firm believer
technology
can't take the place of his
experience and
good training, but says he
thinks devices
like LINX IAS are useful.
MAN: I can see if they need to
keep their
hands up, but it gives me
something to show
them, physically show them, look
how often
you're getting hit. What's the
story here?
SASHA-ANN SIMONS: For the "PBS
NewsHour,"
I'm Sasha-Ann Simons in
Rochester, New York.
GWEN IFILL: Thank you, WXXY, for
-- WXXI for
that report.
You can go to our Web site for
more details
about the election results from
today's primary
voting in Wisconsin.
And thank you very much. I'll
see you again
tomorrow on the "NewsHour." Good
night.
And thank you very much. I'll
see you again
tomorrow on the "NewsHour." Good
night.